---
title: Even Odd in COBOL
layout: default
last-modified: 2021-10-16
featured-image: even-odd-in-cobol-featured-image.jpg
tags: [COBOL, even-odd]
authors: [ShivaniThevar]
---

In this arrticle, we will learn how to check whether a number is even or odd in COBOL. Before doing that, it is preferred that you check out the article ["Hello World in COBOL](https://sample-programs.therenegadecoder.com/projects/hello-world/cobol/) to better understand the basic functions of COBOL.

## How to Implement the Solution

Let us first look at the code:

```COBOL
IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
PROGRAM-ID. EVEN-ODD.
DATA DIVISION.
WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
	01 CMDARGS PIC X(38).
	01 NUM     PIC S9(30).
PROCEDURE DIVISION.
	ACCEPT CMDARGS FROM COMMAND-LINE.
	IF CMDARGS IS ALPHABETIC THEN
		DISPLAY "Usage: please input a number"
		STOP RUN.
	COMPUTE NUM = FUNCTION NUMVAL(CMDARGS).
	IF NUM IS NUMERIC THEN
		IF FUNCTION MOD (NUM, 2) = 0 THEN
			DISPLAY "Even"
		ELSE
			DISPLAY "Odd"
	ELSE
		DISPLAY "Usage: please input a number"
	STOP RUN.
```

Let us try to understand the code step-wise. 

First, we must make sure we include the mandatory `DIVISIONS` in the beginning. The `IDENTIFICATION DIVISION` is used to specify the type of program following a `PROGRAM-ID`. In this case, we have written EVEN-ODD to identify the code.

Next comes the `DATA DIVISION`. Here, we define our data variables, for example, integer, alphabetic etc. Here, we have mentioned `CMDARGS` and `NUM` which means Command Arguments and Number respectively. CMDARGS and NUM ensures that the data entered is a number and only then stores it in numeric data. If the data is not a number, the program will give out ask the user to enter a number. `PIC` stands for 'Picture Clause' which defines the type and size of data. `X` represents Alpha-numeric data can be expected in Command Arguments (maximum size is 38 bytes). We have used alphanumeric because the user can also enter alphabets instead of a number. On the other hand, `S9` shows that a number with positive or negative values can be expected as data (maximum size is 30 bytes).

Moving on, we encounter `PROCEDURE DIVISION`. This section includes the actual code with its functions. To solve this problem, we will use a mathematical operator 'Module' (%) which divides two numbers and returns the remainder. So, if we divide any even number with 2, the remainder will always be 0, whereas, if we divide any odd number with 2, the remainder would be 1. 

For example, 12 % 2 = 0 and 13 % 2 = 1.

`ACCEPT` is a keyword used to accept arguments(data) from the Command-Line. So, this function is used to accept the data entered by the user and run it through the code.

If command arguments are alphabetic, the program will display `Usage: please input a number` and stop the program.

`NUMVAL` extracts numeric data from an alphanumeric data and stores them.

Next, we have a nested (one inside the other) IF conditions. `IF NUM IS NUMERIC THEN` is used to make sure again that we are only using a numeric data to print an output. So, if the data is a number, the program will go ahead with this condition and the MOD (modulus) operator will be applied on the number. 

`(NUM, 2) = 0` THEN `DISPLAY "Even"`. If the number is even, the remainder will be 0 and the output would be Even.

If this condition is not fulfilled, i.e., if the remainder is not 0, the output will be Odd.

And finally, if the data is not a number, the output will be an error message "Usage: please input a number". 

## How to Run the Solution

To run the solution we will need [a COBOL compiler](https://gnucobol.sourceforge.io/) installed and [the actual code file](https://github.com/TheRenegadeCoder/sample-programs/blob/main/archive/c/cobol/even-odd.cbl#L17).
Finally we need to run these commands in order:

```console
cobc -x even-odd.cbl
$ ./even-odd
```
The commands first compile the source code into an executable and then execute it.
Alternatively, you might want to use an [online COBOL compiler](https://www.jdoodle.com/execute-cobol-online/)
