---
title: Maximum Subarray in Python
layout: default
last-modified: 2020-10-12
featured-image:
tags: [python, maximum-subarray]
authors:
  - Senpai1199
---

In this article, we will be writing a program to calculate the maximum possible sum of a sub array from a given array in Python. We will be using Kadane's Algorithm to find this maximum sum value.

## How to Implement the Solution

Let's look at the code in detail:

code for [maximum_subarray.py](https://github.com/TheRenegadeCoder/sample-programs/blob/master/archive/p/python/maximum_subarray.py):-

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
def maximum_subarray():
    arr = list(int(x) for x in input().split())
    if len(arr) == 0:
        print("The array is empty!")
    ans = 0
    curr_sum = 0
    for i in range(len(arr)):
        if (curr_sum + arr[i] > 0):
            curr_sum += arr[i]
        else:
            curr_sum = 0
        ans = max(ans, curr_sum)
    print(ans)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    maximum_subarray()  # call function to carry out kadane's algorithm
```

### The main Function

Let us breakdown the code in smaller parts,

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    maximum_subarray()
```

This bit of code checks to see if this is the main module run. If true, then it calls the `maximum_subarray()` function which carries out the kadane's algorithm which includes taking array input from standard input and computing max subarray sum value and printing the result to standard output.

```python
def maximum_subarray():
    arr = list(int(x) for x in input().split())
    if len(arr) == 0:
        print("The array is empty!")
        return
    ans = 0
    curr_sum = 0
    for i in range(len(arr)):
        if (curr_sum + arr[i] > 0):
            curr_sum += arr[i]
        else:
            curr_sum = 0
        ans = max(ans, curr_sum)
    print(ans)
```

This is the main function of this file which implements all the algorithm logic. It prompts the user to give an input integer array in the standard input (space separated integers in the terminal), then carries out Kadane's algorithm for that array and prints the result. It also deals with the edge case which arises when the input array is empty.

If the array is not empty, the function initialises `ans` (final value to be returned from the function) and `curr_sum` as 0. It then iterates through the array, keeps adding values to `curr_sum` until `curr_sum > 0`. If `curr_sum` goes to less than 0, then `curr_sum` is set to 0 again and process is carried on for the remaining elements of the array.
Finally, `ans` is set to the maximum of `0` and `curr_sum` and it's value is printed.

1. For example, if `[]` is the input:

- First we compare, if len(arr) == 0
- True
- print "Array is empty!"
- return

2. For example, if `[-1, -2, 1, 2, 3]` is the input:

- First we compare, if len(arr) == 0
- False
- Initialise `curr_sum` and `ans` to 0.
- Now while iterating through the array, index `i` goes from 0 to 4.
- For i = 0 and 1, the initial value of `curr_sum` is 0. 0 + (-1) < 0 and 0 + (-2) < 0, so -1 and -2 are skipped.
- For i = 2,3,4 the values 1,2,3 are added to curr_sum iteratively and finally curr_sum value is `1 + 2 + 3 = 6`
- Max of 0 and 6 is 6. So `ans` gets the value 6.
- Print 6 and return from function.

## How to Run Solution

If you want to run this program, you can download a copy of [Maximum Subarray in Python](https://github.com/TheRenegadeCoder/sample-programs/blob/master/archive/p/python/maximum_subarray.py).

Next, make sure you have the latest Python interpreter (latest stable version of Python 3 will do).

Finally, open a terminal in the directory of the downloaded file and run the following command:

`python maximum_subarray.py`

Alternatively, copy the solution into an online [Python interpreter](https://colab.research.google.com) and hit run.

## Further Reading

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_subarray_problem
